This is the Monterey Bay AI Lab, from start to finish.
It is an autonomous science lab that turns hundreds of public ocean datasets into earlier
honest warnings for coastal hazards.
Here is the whole journey.
Start with the problem.
Coastlines face hazards that hurt people and close beaches: bacteria that make the water unsafe to swim
harmful algal blooms that put the toxin domoic acid into seafood
and low-oxygen dead zones.
Communities need warnings that arrive earlier, and that they can actually trust.
So the lab built a data lakehouse.
It fetches hundreds of raw public sources: Argo floats, ocean observatories
satellite chlorophyll and sea-surface temperature, rainfall and weather forecasts
river flow, and pollution feeds.
Four hundred twenty-six sources and billions of rows are cleaned, named
and governed into trustworthy silver tables before any model sees them.
On top of the clean data run the discovery engines.
Many model families compete: simple baselines, gradient-boosted trees, rankers
neural sequence models, tensor factorizations, and zero-shot foundation models.
No model is trusted because it is fancy.
Each one has to earn its place against a fair, simpler comparison.
This is the heart of the lab: the evidence gate.
Before any experiment runs, the kill metrics are written down in advance.
A candidate signal only survives if it clears every one of them.
This is what keeps the lab honest.
The gate is strict.
A real signal has to beat its own baseline
survive a permutation null where the answers are shuffled
hold up under bootstrap confidence intervals that exclude zero
and pass adversarial red-teams that actively try to break it.
Ranking correlations by metadata is not evidence.
Only the filter is.
The result is a funnel.
Take naive hazard-driver links ranked only by raw correlation: in one audit
two hundred eighty-four of them went in and zero survived the gate
because shared climate trends, sampling effort
and sensor smearing explain spurious correlations away.
Ranking correlations by metadata is not evidence.
The filter is the value
and that same rigor is exactly why the findings that do survive it are trustworthy.
The lab even walks back its own wins.
An early headline claimed a HAB model beat the standard forecast by about ten times.
On inspection, that was a broken-baseline mirage, not real skill
so it was retracted and written into the record as a rejected claim.
Overclaims do not survive contact with the gate.
Here is what did survive.
A zero-shot coastal-bacteria ranker.
A clean-to-dirty warning that catches surprise flips.
Domoic-acid onset forecasting for harmful blooms.
Gulf hypoxia flagging.
Microcystin genotype results that replicated nationally and in Alberta.
And a tsunami screen that cuts false alarms.
Each one cleared the gate.
And then came the newest headline: the Carrier-Timescale Law.
It answers a portfolio-level question.
When does paying for a weather forecast feed actually buy you earlier warning
and when is it wasted money?
The law says a forecast only extends lead time when three conditions all hold.
One: the driver is fast and flashy, like rain, so yesterday's reading goes stale.
Two: there is real headroom over what you already observe.
Three: the regional forecast is accurate enough to cash that headroom.
Two out of three is a null.
All three is a deployable advisory.
That yields a real
shippable product: a two-day-ahead beach bacteria exceedance advisory that runs on a free public NOAA forecast feed.
It is deliberately scoped.
It is a two-day advisory, not three.
It is for densely sampled marine enterococcus beaches.
The effect sizes are modest.
The strength is discipline and portability, not a giant jump in accuracy.
The portability is the surprise.
The advisory was trained on California and New Jersey with zero local labels
then it deployed cold-start onto brand-new networks it had never seen: New South Wales in Australia
and the Texas Gulf coast.
On both
the free forecast feature was load-bearing and beat the local recurrence baseline.
Two independent networks, so it is not a fluke.
There is one more gift.
A free pre-screen.
Using only observed data and no forecast fetch at all
the lab can tell you in advance whether a forecast feed will pay off at a given beach.
The master gate is oracle headroom.
It turns a one-off product into a portfolio tool for deciding where to invest.
All of this lives on a public Mission Control site.
In one place it shows what data exists, which models were built
and what has actually been learned - including the nulls and the claims that were walked back.
It is a living, honest record of the whole lab.
That is the Monterey Bay AI Lab, start to finish.
Hundreds of public datasets, many competing models
and a relentless evidence gate that turns noise into a small number of warnings worth trusting.
The honesty is not a footnote.
It is the whole point.